In the beginning, it was easy to get the entire
community to participate because they were the
pioneers and they had that sense of excitement of
being involved in something that was very new and
starting it. And one of the things that was done was
to have luminarias on every driveway and road and
front yard on Christmas Eve. And using my street
again as a good example, there is probably a third
of the residents that are original purchasers the
resale second or third or fourth time resale
homeowner who has not been to the information
center who has not watched the woodlands grow and
been here from those early days doesn't know why
somebody's knocking on their door saying we need
six dollars for the luminarias for christmas eve
and all the Experienced veteran residents know,
oh, that's for the luminaries, and the whole
community does it. And so now the challenge is to
maintain that small feeling or that sense of
community when we've got 30,000 people so that we
don't become one of those subdivisions, if you
will, where people don't have that sense of
loyalty. How does that challenge be managed? The
WCA, the Woodlands Community Association, is the
one, the best source to help organize the
different villages and get a community-wide
effort going or maintain it. Currently, you'll
talk to people, I'm sure, that are gonna talk about
this year's effort in recycling. The club has been
formed WCA has negotiated with Western Waste to do
some curbside pickup of recyclables on a test
basis to see how the thing can work. We have two
local newspapers.
That helps to get the word out. Again, going back to
the problem of size,
the YMCA, the Little League program, the
churches, the grocery store, when everything was
smaller, you kept running into familiar faces at
every turn. Now, you see many people that you just
don't see very often, and I can feel it, and I'm
certain those that have been here longer than five
and a half years can feel it as well. that that's
going to be a real challenge for us to maintain that
very strong loyalty and sense of community that
the Woodlands has. The lighting of the doves is a
good example where we shut down the road here and
have several thousands of people come and watch
the lighting of the doves before Christmas time.
You can go to that and see a lot of people that you
just didn't see at Little League or soccer or or
church or the grocery store. And you know they live
here. And
in that regard,
I think what will happen is each generation of
homebuyer will have their sense of community. And
as we go ever further to the west and to the north as
we develop, will have sub-neighborhoods within
the woodlands where they may have a particular
bond with one another. And there will be a sense of
sub-community within the woodlands. I would
think it's overly sanguine to expect, in a
community of 30,000 people, which may double in 10
years, that people are going to say the woodlands
as a possessive. They may say Grogan's Mill as a
possessive, or some other government. I don't
think that's going to happen. And in a way, we've
unconsciously done that.
What I'm trying to say is that we've somewhat
synchronized the construction activity
in in a sizable portion of the new home offering.
And what I'm trying to say is one of the areas that we
did in North Panther Creek had village weekly life
forms, the smaller custom and the medium sized
custom homes. We had 600 home sales all take place
within a two year period, all in one general
vicinity. in the past many times we would have had
the custom activity finishing up in one area while
the production housing was starting up in a new
area and we had sort of leapfrogged with
production first and then custom later and you had
some
lag of one or two or three years before a particular
30-40 acre section got developed and so you really
You never got everybody moving in all at one time
and then all the construction being finished all
at one time and the project be finished. And I think
that just as things have worked out, partly
because of the pace that we were fortunate enough
to enjoy where we were selling 600, 700, 800 a year,
you can go in and finish something. I think we got
out of that pattern in the early 80s because The
plan was certainly to finish as quickly as
possible, but the market wasn't there, and so the
sales slowed down, and it just didn't work out. You
mentioned this was accidental. Having
recognized the advantage of doing that, is that
now going to be a built-in element? It's as much as,
boy, to the extent the market will let us do it,
absolutely. Because if there's one thing that
upsets current residents, It's the activity of
subcontractors on their property while building
a home next door.
From trash to debris and beer bottles or whatever,
it's a problem for the developer to keep the
existing resident happy with respect to radios
blaring at 6 in the morning. It's not a pleasant
experience to have a home built next door to your
home or a block away for that matter. And that's
been one of the sort of fringe benefits of this pace
that we've enjoyed. We really get in and out of a
neighborhood. You know, the trucks are off the
street and people, you know, the sandwich pickups
aren't coming up and down the street. It's a better
street. It's a better environment. Do you work
with the builders as well? I don't work directly
with them. Ted Nelson is the director of lot sales
and he's deals one-on-one with them in terms of
putting the lots under contract and day-to-day
negotiations, if you will. I just wondered,
because the other side of the story you're telling
me is that, yes, we worked hard with the realtors,
yes, we worked hard with the companies and
residents, future and past. How have we worked
with the builders to... All right, let me go back to
that. Maybe this is a longer story than I realized,
but One of the other things that was clear to me in
1985, and that was that the Woodlands home designs
were woefully out of date. All of my experience
prior to coming up here had been on the west side of
Houston. And at that time, in the new homes, by and
large, you had to have, in order to be competitive
the glass showers in the master baths, or the
Jennier cook range in the kitchen, or an island in
the kitchen,
the atrium windows over the kitchen window, or
skylights, 10-foot ceilings, plant ledges, a
whole lot of excitement on the interior of the
home. And I got here, and the kitchens were small,
the cabinet count was small, They didn't have
sizable kitchen family living room
arrangements. The designs were out of date.
Ted Nelson and I took it upon ourselves to go and
find some new builders or try to get the existing
builders to change. I think we turned over about
50% of the new home builder group. Some of them
wisely said, I've made a lot of money and I'm not
going to try and build homes in the late 80s. And
they kept their money. What do you mean by that? You
mean they said, we're not going to play? They just
said, I just don't want to risk my money. I don't
want to be a home builder in the 80s, in the last half
of the 80s.
I think I'm done. And whatever their goal was, they
picked up their marbles and went home.
Fortunately, those who stayed and the ones that
we've since recruited have come here and brought
new designs, sat down with the salespeople and
said, tell us what the buyers are asking for. We
then encouraged them to provide a minimum number
of inventory of homes. And we said, you've got to
have this many homes in inventory for the
springtime, prime buying season. We've got all
this work going on with Wanda Mason and the Relo
companies and the realtor community promising
that we're going to have plenty of new home
inventory. We're looking to you to provide it, and
we're also looking to you to provide what's going
to sell. And we really, I think the numbers are like
85 or 90 homes in 85 that were custom, and then it
grew to about 125. Today we're at about a third are
custom, and they steadily grew. 120, 152, 250, and
on up to about three this year. So we changed what
the homebuyers saw when they got here. And we
changed some of our planning to accommodate a
little bit wider lot. There's a big demand. One of
the big things, especially with the number of
out-of-town buyers who came from a community
where they had a basement, there's no basement. So
we have a third garage whenever possible. because
they have the need for the space to put their stuff
in. So a little bit wider garage, a little bit
deeper garage, and then just all of those things I
mentioned about higher ceilings and all the other
do-why gadgets in the house has really created an
exciting group of homes to come and look at, and
they'll showcase the homes that we do every
spring. Has brought some new and innovative stuff
And so that has helped the pace of new home sales,
obviously. So we changed what was being offered as
well. And that was another good strategic move,
was to go out and get the right stuff to be built. So
we did some internal things and paid a lot of
attention to the external things.
Now the big challenge for 1991 is going to be, will
the people coming from the east or west coast be
able to sell their house? Yeah. I'm running out of
time. You're running out of time. But that's
something I want to explore a little bit. What does
the future hold for the woodlands? That's one
thing I want you to think about, not just in the
short term, but also maybe through the year 2000
and beyond. Because one of the things I'm looking
at George Mitchell, whose vision and personality
is stamped all over the place, is 72.
The Woodlands obviously isn't going to tap out at
150,000 until a good 25, 30 years, not really more.
In fact, that's one of the things about his vision
that is so intriguing, is he's planning for things
which he will never see. Oh, really? Is he planning
that? I don't know. Yeah, that's true. He may, like
God, strides the world and thinks he will never
die. But
what I'm curious about, though, is what
challenges do you foresee, perceive? How
successful do you think that vision will be
with the possible exit of Mr. Mitchell? How
enduring is that vision? How baked into the
infrastructure is that vision? Those kinds of
questions.
There is, to my knowledge,
no public or private document that talks about
what happens after that date. Mr. Mitchell's not
personally addressing our focus. So it's just my
hunch. My hunch is that he
will have put in place some mechanism whereby his
desires will be adhered to.
In terms of the good feeling that people have about
the Woodlands people live here now I think it will
keep that good feeling as I said where we moved in
600 people in two years to one area will continue to
have that good feeling on on a small sub community
level but I think that one of the things that the
the scope of things that unite the people in the
woodlands will adjust to the the growth and the one
example that i'm thinking about right now to try to
explain what i mean by those words is the pavilion
you can't have a pavilion that holds 11 000 people
and doing a community-wide event if you've only
got 11 000 people if you've got 30 000 people now you
can deal with the scale and scope of a facility like
the pavilion. The mall, I'm sure, will have events
that will be suitable for a community of 60,000 or
90,000 or whatever the final number may be. And he
may have visions of things beyond that. I don't
know. But whenever... The planning number I heard
is 100 and a half. Oh, yeah. But what I'm saying is I
don't know what facility... would balance with a
community of that size. Is it another mall? Is it a
hyper mall? Is it like the one in Canada with the
Walt Disney thing under one roof? I don't know. But
the concept of, in a way, not in a way, but very
dramatically, the shift to the focus on the
environment could make Mr. Mitchell appear to be
more of a genius than he is. because if you go back to
the 70s when the Woodlands was launched and you
remember a John Denver and the
anti-establishment kind of feeling, this was a
real progressive thing. To me, that's one of the
marketing challenges we have is in its day, the
Woodlands was very new, made a major break from the
development community standards of its day.
Today, friends of mine that work for other
developers have caught up on paper they all have
hike and bike trails they all have amenities they
all on paper will read a master plan community our
challenge is going to be how to get different from
our competition as it exists today again and still
adhere to the natural look the mix of different
housing styles in one neighborhood, I think those
things will happen. But the challenge is already
being met, though, in a way. Mr. Mitchell and Marty
Souter, Dominic Lamb, there's a bunch of people
who are in fact addressing issues that King would
never address. The vision is a distinct vision.
That is, let's have a lot of people, a significant
proportion, maybe even a third of the people
working in the woodlands. We drive five minutes
and they're at work. They can go home for lunch.
That kind of thing is novel. Absolutely.
My crystal ball gets real foggy when you talk about
fifty thousand plus I
think that what we have achieved from the
residential standpoint and the balance of
housing and the pace of 900 or so a year is a is a bit of
a plateau and a good one and a comfortable one and
We hope to do a little bit better than that in terms
of our 25-year projections.
Will the time ever come when you guys are held back
so that, in fact, the job creating element can
catch up? There's an incipient danger. in this
community in that it could turn into another
development. If, in fact, those jobs don't come
online, it becomes another Kingwood in a way.
Again, going back to external factors and their
effect on our success, one of the other major ones
that I left out was the tollway system in Houston.
And to answer what you've just addressed about
internal job growth, I'd submit that the Sam
Houston Tollway and Hardy Toll Road will provide,
they're already providing, homebuyers who work
in far west Houston because they want to be with
trees. And I would say that all the mega plans that
exist for mass transportation in Houston, that
even without internal job growth, the home sales
will be there because the transportation will be
improved to the point that we'll be able to
accommodate the commuter better. That I
understand. My concern was in terms of how much
commitment, I guess, is what I'm asking. Is there
to the holistic, philosophical basis upon which
the Woodlands was created? That is, that it is in
fact a hometown, that people work here, they play
here, they live here. Do you see what I'm saying?
And when one gets out of balance with the other, or
isn't even close, or will that even be allowed to
happen? That's a good question for somebody else.
My only comment would be that the amount of money
that has been and is being invested in the job
creation side, I would venture to say it's
unrealistic to think that we would abandon that.
That's kind of what you're calling for. I agree. If
it doesn't work, will we abandon it? I think that's
not one of the choices. No, that wasn't in a way, but
I also wondered, will you be allowed to
grow at the rates which you can grow, given the
tollway access, when the philosophical
underpinnings of the woodlands get undermined
because it becomes really a residential
community? Too normal? Yeah, too normal. Too
normal? Yeah. I don't know. That's a good
question. I don't know. Of course, you probably
wouldn't decide that anyway. Yeah. I've got to
go. Okay. Good, because I can't answer the
question.